blog: Windows Operational Readiness (#45130)
kubernetes/website: content/en/blog/_posts/2024-03-18-windows-ops-readiness.md

---
layout: blog
title: "Introducing the Windows Operational Readiness Specification"
date: 2024-03-18
slug: intro-windows-ops-readiness
---

**Authors:** Jay Vyas (Tesla), Amim Knabben (Broadcom), and Tatenda Zifudzi (AWS)

# Introducing the Windows Operational Readiness Specification

> Since Windows support [graduated to stable](https://github.com/kubernetes/sig-release/blob/master/releases/release-1.14/release-notes-draft.md) with 1.14 in 2019, the capability to run Windows workloads has consistently been a major differentiator for Kubernetes distributions in the enterprise. However, with more Windows workloads being migrated to Kubernetes and new Windows features being continuously released, it became challenging to test Windows worker nodes in an effective and standardized way.

Reviewer: Hmm. Old release notes are [broken](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/releases/tag/v1.14.0). I wonder if we can get SIG Release to fix that so we can link to the official release announcement? Or, link to https://kubernetes.io/blog/2019/03/25/kubernetes-1-14-release-announcement/ instead.

How about:
```suggestion
Since Windows support [graduated to stable](/blog/2019/03/25/kubernetes-1-14-release-announcement/)
with Kubernetes 1.14 in 2019, the capability to run Windows workloads has been much
appreciated by the end user community. The level of and availability of Windows workload
support has consistently been a major differentiator for Kubernetes distributions used by
large enterprises. However, with more Windows workloads being migrated to Kubernetes
and new Windows features being continuously released, it became challenging to test
Windows worker nodes in an effective and standardized way.
```

Some notable examples brought to the attention of SIG Windows were:

> - An issue with [loadBalancerSourceRanges](https://kubernetes.io/docs/reference/generated/kubernetes-api/v1.29/#:~:text=loadBalancerSourceRanges) functionality not operating correctly on Windows nodes, detailed in a GitHub issue [kubernetes/kubernetes#120033](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120033).

Reviewer: Even though Chrome supports that kind of fragment identifier, I wouldn't include that link (it's not a standardized mechanism, and the single-page API reference you've linked to is one we plan to supersede).
```suggestion
- An issue with load balancer source address ranges functionality not operating correctly on
  Windows nodes, detailed in a GitHub issue:
  [kubernetes/kubernetes#120033](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/120033).
```

> - Reports of functionality issues with Windows features, such as “[GMSA](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/security/group-managed-service-accounts/group-managed-service-accounts-overview) isn’t working, why?”, discussed in [microsoft/Windows-Containers#44](https://github.com/microsoft/Windows-Containers/issues/44).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Reports of functionality issues with Windows features, such as
  “[GMSA](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows-server/security/group-managed-service-accounts/group-managed-service-accounts-overview) isn’t working, why?”,
  discussed in [microsoft/Windows-Containers#44](https://github.com/microsoft/Windows-Containers/issues/44).
```

> - Challenges developing networking policy tests that could objectively evaluate Container Network Interfaces (CNIs) across different operating system configurations, as discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes#97751](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/97751)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Challenges developing networking policy tests that could objectively evaluate
  Container Network Interface (CNI) plugins across different operating system configurations,
  as discussed in [kubernetes/kubernetes#97751](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/issues/97751).
```

> The SIG Windows community therefore recognized the need for a tailored solution to ensure Windows nodes' operational readiness *before* their deployment into production environments. Thus, the [Windows Operational Readiness Specification](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/d60c6149551b7f852c16842fb952a499c2cc4315/keps/sig-windows/2578-windows-conformance/README.md) was born.

Reviewer: SIG Windows is a group, not a community; try this:
```suggestion
SIG Windows therefore recognized the need for a tailored solution to ensure Windows
nodes' operational readiness *before* their deployment into production environments.
Thus, the idea to develop a [Windows Operational Readiness Specification](https://kep.k8s.io/2578)
was born.
```

> # Can’t we just run the Conformance tests?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Can’t we just run the official Conformance tests?
```

The Kubernetes project contains a set of [conformance tests](https://github.com/kubernetes/kubernetes/blob/master/test/conformance/testdata/conformance.yaml), which are standardized tests designed to ensure that a Kubernetes cluster meets the required Kubernetes specifications.

> However, these tests were originally defined at a time when Linux was the *only* operating system compatible with Kubernetes, and thus, they were not easily extendible for use with Windows. Given that Windows workloads, despite their importance, account for a smaller portion of the Kubernetes community, it was important to ensure that the primary conformance suite relied upon by many Kubernetes distributions to certify Linux conformance, didn't become encumbered with Windows specific features or enhancements such as GMSA or multi-operating system kube-proxy behavior.

Reviewer: We might want to mention that, as a project, we value being able to certify conformance without forcing a closed-source licence on a certified distribution or service that doesn't plan to actually offer Windows.

Therefore, since there was a specialized need for Windows conformance testing, SIG Windows went down the path of offering Windows specific conformance tests through the Windows Operational Readiness Project.

> # Can’t we just run the Kubernetes e2e suite?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Can’t we just run the Kubernetes end-to-end test suite?
```

In the Linux world, tools such as [Sonobuoy](https://sonobuoy.io/) simplify execution of the conformance suite, relieving users from needing to be aware of Kubernetes' compilation paths or the semantics of Ginkgo tags.

Regarding needing to compile the Kubernetes tests, we realized that Windows users might similarly find the process of compiling and running the Kubernetes e2e suite from scratch similarly undesirable, hence, there was a clear need to provide a user-friendly, "push-button" solution that is ready to go. Moreover, regarding Ginkgo tags, applying conformance tests to Windows nodes through a set of [Ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) tags would also be burdensome for any user, including Linux enthusiasts or experienced Windows system admins alike.

> To bridge the gap and give users a straightforward way to confirm their clusters support a variety of features, the SIG Windows community found it necessary to therefore create the Windows Operational Readiness application. This application written in Go, simplifies the process to run the necessary Windows specific tests while delivering results in a clear, accessible format.

Reviewer: SIG Windows is a _special interest group_, not a community.

This initiative has been a collaborative effort, with contributions from different cloud providers and platforms, including Amazon, Microsoft, SUSE, and Broadcom.

> # A Closer Look at the Windows Operational Readiness Specification

Reviewer: Sentence case for headings, please.
```suggestion
## A closer look at the Windows Operational Readiness Specification {#specification}
```

The Windows Operational Readiness specification specifically targets and executes tests found within the Kubernetes repository in a more user-friendly way than simply targeting [Ginkgo](https://onsi.github.io/ginkgo/) tags. It introduces a structured test suite that is split into sets of core and extended tests, with each set of tests containing categories directed at testing a specific area of testing, such as networking. Core tests target fundamental and critical functionalities that Windows nodes should support as defined by the Kubernetes specification. On the other hand, extended tests cover more complex features, more aligned with diving deeper into Windows-specific capabilities such as integrations with Active Directory. These goal of these tests is to be extensive, covering a wide array of Windows-specific capabilities to ensure compatibility with a diverse set of workloads and configurations, extending beyond basic requirements. Below is the current list of categories.

> | **Category Name**        | **Category Description**                                     |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Category Name            | Category Description                                         |
```

| ------------------------ | ------------------------------------------------------------ |
| `Core.Network`           | Tests minimal networking functionality, e.g. ability to access pod-by-pod IP. |
| `Core.Storage`           | Tests minimal storage functionality, e.g. ability to mount a hostPath storage volume. |
| `Core.Scheduling`        | Tests minimal scheduling functionality, e.g. ability to schedule a pod with CPU limits. |
| `Core.Concurrent`        | Tests minimal concurrent functionality, e.g. the ability of a node to handle traffic to multiple pods concurrently. |
| `Extend.HostProcess`     | Tests features related to Windows HostProcess pod functionality. |
| `Extend.ActiveDirectory` | Tests features related to Active Directory functionality.    |
| `Extend.NetworkPolicy`   | Tests features related to Network Policy functionality.      |
| `Extend.Network`         | Tests advanced networking functionality, e.g. ability to support IPv6 |

> | `Extend.Worker`          | Tests features related to Windows worker node functionality, e.g. ability for nodes to access TCP and UDP services in the same cluster |

Reviewer: Ideally, rewrite the “e.g.” to avoid abbreviated Latin (we also do that in our tech docs)

> # How to Conduct Operational Readiness Tests for Windows Nodes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to conduct operational readiness tests for Windows nodes
```

> To run the Windows Operational Readiness test suite, refer to the project’s [README.md](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/windows-operational-readiness/blob/main/README.md), which provides more elaborate instructions. The project offers flexibility in how you can execute tests, either using a compiled binary or a Sonobuoy plugin. You also have the choice to run the tests against the entire test suite or by specifying a list of categories. Cloud providers have the choice of uploading their conformance results, enhancing transparency and reliability.

Reviewer: The _project_ is Kubernetes, so:
```suggestion
To run the Windows Operational Readiness test suite, refer to the test suite's
[`README`](https://github.com/kubernetes-sigs/windows-operational-readiness/blob/main/README.md),
which explains how to set it up and run it.
The test suite offers flexibility in how you can execute tests, either using a compiled binary
or a Sonobuoy plugin. You also have the choice to run the tests against the entire test suite
or by specifying a list of categories. Cloud providers have the choice of uploading their
conformance results, enhancing transparency and reliability.
```

> A sample command to run the tests on the `Core.Concurrent` category is as follows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once you have checked out that code, you can run a test. For example, this sample command
runs the tests from the `Core.Concurrent` category:
```

```

> ./op-readiness --kubeconfig $KUBE_CONFIG --category Core.Concurrent

Reviewer: Is this POSIX shell? PowerShell? Would be nice to add the right highlighting and to tell readers what shell we expect them to be running.

```

If you want to test your changes against a specific pull request using the Windows Operational Readiness Specification, use the following bot command in the new pull request.

```
/test operational-tests-capz-windows-2019
```

> # Looking Ahead

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Looking ahead
```

We’re looking to improve our curated list of Windows-specific tests by adding new tests to the Kubernetes repository and also identifying existing test cases that can be targetted. The long term goal for this subproject is to continually enhance test coverage for Windows worker nodes and improve the robustness of Windows support, facilitating a seamless experience across diverse cloud environments. We also have plans to integrate the Windows Operational Readiness tests into the official Kubernetes conformance suite.

> If you are interested in helping us out, please reach out to us! We welcome help in any form, from giving once-off feedback to making a code contribution, to having long-term owners to help us drive changes. The Windows Operational Readiness is owned by the SIG Windows team as a sub-project. You can reach out to the team on the [Kubernetes Slack workspace](https://communityinviter.com/apps/kubernetes/community) **#sig-windows** channel. You can also explore the [Windows Operational Readiness GitHub project](https://raw.githubusercontent.com/kubernetes-sigs/windows-operational-readiness) and make contributions directly to the project.

Reviewer: - We should ask people to visit https://slack.k8s.io/ for an invitation.
- I do recommend calling Windows Operational Readiness a specification or test suite or tool or something, _not_ a project. It's not a project the way that Kubernetes is a project, and it's not a [project](https://docs.github.com/en/issues/planning-and-tracking-with-projects/automating-your-project/using-the-api-to-manage-projects) the way GitHub means it either.
